our next speaker Shi bassu is a
multimedia performance artist curator
composer activist and arts organizer
born and based in the unseated
territories of the Cheno alone peoples
or Oakland California they create
expansive textural sound and performance
pieces investigating resistance and
organizing strategies through decolonial
World building and interactive sculpture
chy currently serves as the executive
director of vital Arts where they
advocate for housing Justice and artist
self-determination um they also serve on
the board of Bay Area girls Rock Camp
California FM and safer DIY spaces uh
take it away
Chari um hello
everyone uh this is called artist
housing and Liberation strategies I
don't know how much this talk is going
to be about all of these things but um
I'm really hoping it can be like a
little bit of a recent history lesson
just kind of an understanding of what
the Bay Area art ecosystem really is
comprised of right now so um thank you
Wade for your intro so I don't have to
do that part um but yeah this is me I am
mostly a sound artist my primary
performance pro project is called Beast
Nest I've played here a million times
and all over the Bay Area and um also
have founded a lot of kind of
equity-based
um uh collectives and series um I
started the multiverses illuminated
which is was the first ever black and
brown Punk Festival um primarily catered
towards que and trans black and brown
artists doing experimental stuff and
then I used to run um a improvisational
Collective called the mar Mara
performance Collective that really used
improvisation as like a way to transmute
trauma experiences and then also used to
run a smaller series called Brown noise
which was mostly for queer and trans um
folks of color doing experimental music
and this is me doing some stuff that's
great area right there um and uh yeah uh
this is a piece that existed primarily
in um Mozilla hubs it's called car at St
Cole and it's really about care work as
kind of um a really comp
complex uh
thing um okay so before I kind of go
into everything I'm really interested in
who's in this audience um uh so I would
love to know who lives here in the Bay
Area raise your hand woo cute okay lots
of you um and then outside of the barar
area but in
California cute um less folks and then
anyone who's outside of California but
in the
US awesome um and then who lives outside
of the US here just a couple awesome um
and then switching over who here
identifies as an artist or a cultural
worker okay about half of you so that's
interesting um I guess of the artists
who feels like they make most of their
income from their
art maybe like
five who makes like half of their income
from their
art like two three 3ish three and a half
and then who can pay their rent with
just their art
here a few okay great um so that just
tells you right here we're in gray area
gray area attracts like you know a
certain culture and caliber of artists
that's like really impressive and
amazing and there's still like maybe
like one to 5% of the people in this
audience can pay their rent with their
art that should tell you something um um
so I am the executive director of vital
Arts um and uh you know vital Arts was
founded to honor the victims of the
Ghost Ship fire and we work really to
ensure safe and affordable spaces for
artists to live work and perform um we
do that through a number of different
strategies um both short-term relief and
long-term solution building with artist
mobilization polic advocacy um education
and data Gathering
um and then we also have founded the
artist based trust which is the first
land trust project in the country that
is for artists um and if you don't know
what a community land trust is it
essentially is a a process that takes
property off of the speculative Market
um allows it to be very affordable or
like regularly affordable or like very
very affordable for like the lowest um
the lowest income indexes basically and
keeps those properties in the hands of
for artist based trust it's in the hands
of artists forever essentially so
whoever leaves new artists will come in
that kind of vibe so that's the process
that we have just started it's like a
year and a half old um and yeah so I'm
really excited to talk to you about
artists um um and some more about what
artist uh what vital Arts is doing
um so our work really has like three
goals uh first one is to prevent the
loss and displacement of artists and so
um you know this all kind of started
with the Ghost Ship fire which I'll talk
in a little bit but uh through the
gentrification of the Bay Area but then
especially after the Ghost Ship fire
there was this huge and who here is not
familiar with what the Ghost Ship fire
is okay I'll I'll I'll talk about it in
just a second um but uh there's been
this massive displacement of artists
from big cities um but particularly
spaces where the rent has exponentially
increased uh like the Bay Area after the
Ghost Ship fire the Ghost Ship fire was
a fire that that happened in a warehouse
it was a party that was happening at
this live workspace in East Oakland um
it took the lives of 36 folks uh I lost
like 13 friends um a former partner of
mine died in the fire and then it just
kind of had huge ripples throughout the
entire honestly the entire world
immediately after folks in Denver if
people are remember spaces like roseris
like they were getting evicted and then
we went on I remember I went on tour in
like 2017 throughout Europe and like
people in Amsterdam and Berlin were like
yeah like our spaces are now kind of
even being um at risk of closure because
of the way that cities and states and
countries have weaponized fire code as a
way to displace people essentially um so
it was this really crazy thing it was
obviously you know for myself and my
community and folks in the Bay Area
Folks at Great area um it uh had like
this big grief like psychedelic
Collective grief moment for us but then
there was also this like huge scarcity
moment where people were being displaced
from both their homes and then losing
spaces to like work and perform um and
so yeah vital Arts we're kind of trying
to prevent that displacement and stem it
where it is now um we're kind of acting
as like a resource navigator also
because resource navigation for artists
is like not super um accessible so if
you're an artist that maybe needs you
know grant writing there's some places
you can go but if you're like an artist
facing displacement from your home like
where do you go that is like art focused
like I you know nowhere um and then you
know recently
I um recently in this role as the
executive director we're really trying
to focus on historically oppressed
artists so queer and trans artists black
and brown artists artists who are
consistently maybe less um less
typically funded by bigger institutions
uh DJs uh performance artists drag
queens like whatever you know and then I
count musicians also because it's really
hard to get funding as a musician
um in a visual arts heavy World um and
so these are the beautiful people who
passed away in the Ghost Ship fire um
and uh I actually first came to gray
area uh I mean I had been around gray
area as like a Community member and as
an artist but my first big like
connection with gray area was actually
um post the fire I and four other queer
um activists kind of got together and
started doing like a DIY Mutual Aid fund
uh so we raised like $100,000 just from
like Community Mutual Aid which is
generally how a lot of like lower income
artists survive is through like Mutual
Aid processes like that but this was
like beyond anything I had seen before
it was really beautiful to watch and
just weird to navigate um and so we had
done this like little I mean little in
comparison but um we raised $100,000
were getting funds to folks pretty
immediately family members friends um
chosen family and then we were
contracted the five of us were
contracted to work with gray area to
disperse this $1 million and so we
worked with gray area to um it was a
very long process it took like a year um
but we were able to disperse nearly a
million dollars to um friends and family
and then also made this new kind of
relief bracket called chosen family
which um you know for us being kind of
just like whatever punks and being able
to give money to our friends like we
could be like chosen family what like we
didn't have any restrictions because it
was just Mutual aid but with
organizations there's always
restrictions and so for us I it's it was
really re lutionary actually that we
were able to focus on like what trans
queer and trans family structures look
like what chosen family structures look
like you might not have a relationship
with your family um but then you have
multiple partners who like you are in uh
that you know you survive with and so
that loss impacts a different kind of
household and so being able to build
that was really exciting for us um I
mean it was bittersweet obviously but um
yeah so that's kind of my main like
Touchstone with gray area and I just
wanted to kind of put that out here
because that's also the history of this
space and you know there were
complications a lot of complications
around the whole thing um but the fact
that people on like at in the at the end
of the day got support to experience
this like really intensive Collective
grief moment was really powerful and it
was like community-led and Community run
um okay so I'm gonna kind of you know
we're all artists here and I just
actually came from a talk at a at a
community Land Trust conference so I
have all these statistics that I'm going
to read at you um because I'm really
thinking about artists in the housing
ecos system and how difficult it is for
artists to have spaces to play outside
of like you know in San Francisco it's a
little easier I live in Oakland in the
East Bay there's like no nothing you
know um and so um I'm really thinking
about space and then I'm really thinking
about housing um and just how difficult
it is for anyone to continue their art
practice in the Bay Area and actually
pay their rent you know um or not just
go straight into homelessness um so
artists and culture Bears represent some
of our most our state's most
disenfranchise labor workforces and art
is labor everyone here is doing labor um
everyone working here is doing labor
it's work you know and it's hard work
and it's very underfunded work um
artists create and generate their own
economies based in mutual Aid um I think
anyone here who like started as kind of
like a sound artist
in Punk or noise world knows that like
you're just your friend you're paying
your friends and your friends are paying
you like it is a economy that you have
created for yourself because there is no
institution that's supporting you um
artists are activists artists are
storytellers culture Keepers and bearers
of the multiplicity of Truth um we're
researchers uh we are your designers and
your Community Builders um and we
logistically operationally and em do not
organize gather or further the success
of our businesses our communities our
organizations without an intrinsic
Reliance on the Arts and the laborers
who make the Arts happen which is
artists um and so here's all these words
that probably is hard for you to read so
I'll read it for you um um
so essentially uh did you know that it
saids 7.5 I think it's actually
7.7% um of California's entire economy
um is based on it comes from arts and
culture the arts and culture sector and
so that means that artists and that um
roughly comes out to $225 billion and a
lot of that you know I think can come
from the entertainment industry but it's
not just that just so to be clear um and
then uh in 2024 as further context the
state budget was cut the state Arts
budget was cut and um the state of
California only has 26 million so in one
year they generated 20 225 billion but
then only um we we only have 26 million
for this year across the entire State of
California including huge cities like La
huge cities like San Francisco Oakland
Sacramento um uh and then in the Bay
Area we found that um 75 70% of our
had been or were being displaced from
their workplace and home so this is like
a couple years into the pandemic and you
know we we're making all this money and
yet 70% of us are having to move right
um in some way either from a home to not
a home or a home to a different home um
and then
alternatively the California Department
it we call the short term is hcds um
housing and Community Development um
found that 70% of artists live rent
living space so that means that the
major the vast majority of artists are
not living in homes that they own just
to be clear that includes like co-ops or
clts or anything else um and then 77%
are rent burden 82% do their creative
work in their homes I think that can be
true for all of us um who make it's like
that's where we work um and
um and so recently one of the programs
that we do is an artist displacement
prevention Grant um it's a very small we
don't have a lot of money so it's a very
small relief program that uh goes
directly to artists just to support
their transition in displacement um
situations so they might be experiencing
homelessness recent homeless they might
be living in their car an RV something
like that or um are being like facing
imminent eviction um after the pandemic
and you know there were all these rent
strikes and then they kind of
transferred into something else oh my
God am I already almost done ah I didn't
talk about anything
um uh okay so um how am I gonna do this
um okay
so
uh the so we found that the folks who
applied for our grants most of them the
vast majority of them were experiencing
homelessness or imminent displacement
this was the first time we did this um
uh 80% of them identified as black
indigenous or folks of color so 80% of
our artists who are experiencing
homelessness for folks of color and then
um 55% of our total applicants were
black and then 75% of our applicants
identified as either TR trans or
non-binary so that's not like other LGB
stuff like it's not gay lesbian it's
trans or non-binary so trans folks of
color who are artists
are experiencing homelessness despite
all of the money that we're making them
um and then uh in SF there's the
transgender uh interex justice project
um and they have a really radical um
housing subsidy program through the
mayor's office of Housing and Community
Development and um 85% of their housing
sub subsidy
participants uh identify as um artists
so those are mostly black and brown
mostly black trans women but they are
able to live off of subsidy and there's
some people who have like you know like
star armar rasu jasmine Infinity like
these folks who have like these actually
are very well known in a lot of music
and performance communities and were
only able to survive here based on
getting the subsidy program and then for
85% of their subsidy recipients to
identify as artist again just tells you
the state of poverty that artists are
experiencing for me particularly in the
the Bay Area um so I was going to talk
about some of the stuff that we do the
artist space trust I kind of talked
about it a little bit already um I
wanted to talk about this thing I don't
think I have enough time or do I am I
reading this
wrong
okay am I reading this wrong no maybe
not um okay so um so one of the projects
we are doing is the Bay Area artist
census um this is a regional initiative
to kind of do some like real material
data gathering around what artists are
facing um so we're starting with a
fellowship we really wanted to be artist
L and we're really trying to work with
like collectives and individual artists
who are feel who are experiencing like
the real life material um things and I
think when we think about data Gathering
I think there can be like a lot of
different feelings that come up like
exploitative like what are someone with
a lot of money is going to take a survey
and then say that they're going to do
something and never do it that is
probably going to be the case in some
ways not from my perspective but um but
for us what we're really trying to do is
gather this data and have it in the
hands of the artist so created by
artists for artists and defined by
artists um and what I'm really
interested in is like what do do the
material conditions of artists look like
how many like are you living on a couch
in a house with like six other people
are you in a warehouse um do you have a
landlord that fixes your plumbing like
what are these things that what are the
things that actually Define the
conditions of s of being able to like
Thrive how much of your income how much
of your time is spent on Art a week and
how much of your income comes from art
that is something how much time do you
spend producing I think as a sound
artist there were times where I would be
playing you know two shows in a night
four shows a week just in the bay while
working a full-time job and also working
a part-time job like this is the state
of artists in our cities you know and so
we are working on this project I if you
live in the Bay Area we'll be you know
blasting this out um in the next we're
trying to do a really slow process we're
trying to prioritize again like kind of
marginalized historically oppressed
artists and really um be thoughtful and
Trust based in this um but we're hoping
that we can actually have this be a
pathway for mobilization and like get
people involved with and understand like
what is the ecosystem that you're
operating in I think sometimes
especially with artists like we can be
like super activist about some things
and then other things we just feel like
passive um Witnesses for housing medical
um like your med your health care um
your wages as a performer all of these
things can kind of just feel like oh
well I'm just like like a victim of this
thing or I'm just like I this is just
the consequence of the life that I've
chosen and it's actually not you know um
I don't know if I have time for all of
this stuff but I was going to do a
little like one on one 101 like sound
stuff um so I like to think a lot about
like the sematics and psychosomatics of
sound um and how like we as people are
transducers so who here doesn't know
what a transducer is
okay all of you guys are super smart so
you know but um but uh the basics of
like a transducer is it takes one type
of energy and turns it into another type
of energy so this the microphone is a
transducer it's like physical to
electrical energy the speakers are
transducers and then our bodies are
transducers like we're transducers and
so we're taking like kind of like the
chemical emotions that we feel and the
electrical thoughts that we feel and
then we laugh and then we cry and we
like start drama or you know whatever
take a nap something but that's the
process of us kind of being these like
real life transducers and changing
things into different forms of energy
and so I really like to think about
sound that I like you know sound is like
this pressure wave high low pressure
wave process and how we as transducers
are actually like using um the emotions
and experiences we have have to um
transfer um our experiences into these
creative processes um or even just how
conversations we have are can be like
these forms of art you know um and so
yeah you change stuff we change stuff
from one thing to another um and then
again like I really like to think about
it in terms of like what is how we deal
with trauma and how the practice of art
making or Collective sound making um can
be one like a model for how we
understand how materiality and
immateriality connect right I think
there can be this thing where it's like
oh we don't want to think about emotions
cuz that's not like a material I come
from like kind of a Marxist background
so that was a lot of what I had to deal
with um in certain species um but you
know the the connection between
materiality and immateriality and
actually how immateriality is is a
material process um but then also I
think I like to think a lot about uh the
creation process of sound as being a
trigger instead of just being the and
like when we think about for like you
know when you have a toggle you're the
trick you're you're pressing the thing
instead of just being the activ the
person activated right the thing that is
responding and so um I say all of that
to kind of think about
sound making as like a Liberation
strategy um and for like Collective
really in Collective situations
especially so you know I think like when
you are experiencing oppression when
you're experiencing difficulty any type
of um adversity like one way that we use
sound to process is we might like cry or
we might scream or we might talk about
it right that's those are some like very
basic ways that we use sound but then
this is a picture of boomshake who I
love so deeply they come through so hard
if you've been to like any you know
protests in the Bay Area they've
probably been there with their drums
leading the chance um and then we also
you know see sound as like these
oppressive forces too where it's like
police will use like sound cannons as
for um as a repression strategy during
protests also um but for me just
thinking about that psychosomatic
process and like what it is for a sound
to actually like change the the material
physical properties of a space um can be
like really interesting and also can be
this thing for for me it's like very
difficult to not see the Act of Creation
as a form of activism or political act
um and then I was going to have you guys
do activity I don't have time for that
but I wanted you guys to to talk to each
other about what your conditions are and
what um
what it is
to uh yeah like like what it what are
the challenges that you're experiencing
your life uh in your life in relation to
Art housing um or anything else um we
don't have time that for that so we're
not going to do that but something I
kind of want you to leave with is you
know as folks who are in this Art Space
who are here to learn I want you to
think about like what what pushes you to
engage with like a Civic engagement
process with like kind of fighting for
your rights or and what what prevents
you from doing that what are the things
inside of you that are like kind of like
this feels too hard and it's okay if it
feels too hard too like I'm it's not a
judgment it's just an
investigation um and then like what do
you feel like it's it is necessary for
artists to actually be involved with
advocacy on this level when we kind of
understand the Deep material conditions
of poverty in many cases especially for
the most marginalized folks um and then
yeah what are if outside of like
advocacy and stuff what are other ways
that artists can kind of continue to
thrive in the Bay Area um that's all I
got negative 57 seconds so
thank you so much Charmy and thank you
for all the amazing work you do in the
Bay Area on behalf of artists and
advocating for them I think that you
know obviously our city is one that and
our whole region is one that is going
through a lot of different social crises
at the moment um and so I'm I you know
yet please come and ask us any questions
if you're not from San Francisco and
want to know more about the states of
the Arts here uh Char's an amazing
person to talk to about that but I guess
you know is there if there was you know
just to kind of close out on a hopeful
note or like maybe like a constru Ive
note like where do you see the most
potential for change to happen or where
do you feel like the community or even
people who are adjacent to the community
should be directing their efforts at
this time in this in this moment in our
crazy world I really think um okay I'm
going to try and not make this super
long-winded okay so San Francisco Arts
funding San Francisco Arts commission
the the city of San Francisco's Arts
commission has this like other entity
called grants for the Arts it's called
GI gifta for short San Francisco out of
all the Bay Area cities has the most
money the reason it has the most money
is because of organizing gifta came from
an endowment that came about through
artists who like didn't have anywhere to
live were did like were an older wave of
gentrification um being pushed out got
together and basically came together to
create a policy around having certain
hotel taxes go to the Arts commission
specifically for this grant to go back
to artist and so again San Francisco is
the only Oakland has it just got cut
again it has it has like enough for like
a stapler for like 12 people or
something you know um it really has
nothing and so for me I think because of
the diff it's really hard to organize
right now because no one has time I'm
tired I'm like I want to watch The
Bachelorette you know um I'm like in a
in my you know but it's also this thing
where we like really can't like we have
to talk to each other we actually have
to meet and come up with some like very
simple goals and just do the thing just
show up for like three meetings over a
few months and then do that thing and
like get some things pushed so that we
can get we like just need more we need
more you say buy tickets go to shows
show up be a be a patron be a
participant be an audience member uh
those number at least here at Great area
those numbers help us to raise money
when we know who we're serving and how
many so there's a lot of ways for people
to participate I think yeah donate to
the Arts if you haven't tell your
companies to donate to the Arts yeah
yeah if you if you're you know you got
some stuff some text breaks um but then
also um the other thing I would say is
pay your artists well think about what
the wage you're actually what is the
amount of money you're actually giving
your artist I can't I can't play for
free anymore I can't pay play for $100
anymore I can barely P for $200 you know
like it's like I and I'm a full-time
working person like it's not like it's
it's not my primary source of income but
I just can't do it you know and it's
like the wages in this that artists get
are extremely
one they're biased towards different
types of artists across race and gender
and class I think everyone knows that
but but it's continues to be true um and
then also just like pay them be like
real about how much time something takes
and what the hourly wage of that is and
if it equals the minimum wage of the
person who you know is like working the
door you know Common Sense yeah thank
you so much Charmy really appreciate it